this is super scary 50% of men who kill
themselves have no history or evidence
of mental illness what causes people to
kill themselves is they try to connect
with others and they get rejected you
know it's it's I I can feel the hurt I
can feel the
loss Dr Alo kenoia he's a psychiatrist
Harvard medical school instructor real
life monk who uses his own addictive
past to help millions of people improve
their own mental Heth everyone is
getting screwed but there's a crisis
with people telling us that being a man
means that you're that you're toxic that
there's patriarchy that your
testosterone level makes you violent so
men are struggling right now and the
rest of the world says no you're not
you're privileged and these people have
been literally killing themselves
because no one has been listening to
them except there is one group of people
who says your life your life sucks and
that's these toxic masculine people and
these guys say I will show you a way to
make it better and that's when things go
back and this by the way is how people
wind up with addiction because when you
look at addiction what happens is we use
a substance or a technology as an
antidote to pain so I've worked with
people who have pornography addiction
for example that will have work on one
screen and they will literally have
pornography on the second screen you're
joking no very common and this is where
there's a big problem in the world today
now you've got this young generation of
women as well that are exploding in
their suicidality loneliness seems to be
getting worse and worse what is the
remedy to this so this is something
that's very important to understand
everyone who is listening to this
podcast needs
to it's absolutely crazy to me that so
many of you have decided to watch our
show um and so many of you have decided
to subscribe to our show we now have
five million subscribers on YouTube
which is a number that I just can't
comprehend and it's a dream that I
absolutely never could have had we
started the dire of a CO just over three
years ago now and in my wildest
expectations we might have had 100,000
subscribers by now so you can imagine
how shocked I am that so many of you
have chosen to tune into the these
conversations every week um and spend
some time with us so thank you and I
made a deal with you I made a deal that
if you subscribe to this show that we
would continue to raise the bar and in
2024 we're going to raise the bar like
never before I've been working for the
last 9 months on a surprise for all of
you that have subscribed to the show and
I'm very excited to deliver that for you
the production's going to change we're
going to go even further with our guests
and we're going to tell even more Global
stories so as always if you're
appreciate what we're doing here the
simple free favor I'll ask from you is
to hit the Subscribe button let's get on
with the
[Music]
episode Dr K Stephen with all of your
work and all of the content you've
produced if someone's just clicked on
this podcast
now what do you think they're going to
get out of this conversation what do you
think they're going to walk away with uh
I hope what they'll walk away with is
the realization that you are the
instrument of your life and
understanding that fundamental
instrument that you use to live your
life your body your mind will ultimately
help you accomplish whatever you want
and what is the opposite mindset to that
to understanding that you're the
instrument of your life what is the
typical mindset that people have that go
through their lives think without the
realization that they are the instrument
of their life I think it's assuming that
something outside of them will fix
things inside of them right so people
will think like okay if I get a
promotion then I'll be happy if I date
this person then I will be happy if I
have this amount of money I will be
happy everyone assumes that exter things
outside of you will fix things inside of
you why is this subject close to home
for
you uh because I used to believe that so
I I struggled a lot I mean I'm I'm by
all definitions of the word an absolute
failure um I failed out of college uh
was finished school at the age of 35 or
36 you know it took me a long time to
kind of get on my feet and figure out
what I was doing in my life and I
realized that like the reason that I was
screwing up so much is because I I
always thought that accomplishing
something outside of me or achieving
some kind of goal would make me happy
and I didn't understand that all of my
problems came from me I also BL bled all
kinds of things outside of me so I would
blame circumstances I would blame my
professor is biased this girl
is you know she she doesn't see the the
goodness that I have in me she can't
recognize how awesome I am so I kept on
blaming things outside of me instead of
accepting
responsibility take me from that point
onwards so what
happened that that brings you to sit
here today as an accomplished individual
as a doctor and so on so I I think my
journey starts with failure so I I think
we think about failure as a negative
thing but I think that that's what
actually got me started on my journey
after failing out of college I went to
India and I stayed in a monastery or
asham for about 3 months and it
completely changed the way that I looked
at the world so what I sort of realized
is that kind of like what I was saying
is that see I had assumed that things
outside of me were responsible for
things ins side of me so as a simple
example I attached my n my sense of
selfworth to getting an A so I when I
went to when when when I went to college
I was planning on becoming a doctor and
as any Indian kid wants to do I wanted
to go to Harvard and so I had sort of
all these Grand dreams of what I wanted
to accomplish in life and how I wanted
to be a good force in the world and all
this kind of stuff it's all ego and and
so what sort of happened is even though
I wanted all of these things I assumed
that all of that accomplishment would
bring me happiness it's when I went to
India that I sort of discovered that
like no amount of external
accomplishment will bring you lasting
happiness and this is what we sort of
see these are the people that I work
with now you know I'll work with someone
like a banker or a doctor or a content
creator and for all of these people it's
like once you accomplish your goal your
mind moves the goal posts so you got
promoted a vice president now you need
to be director then you need to be
managing director then you need to be
you know there's always more the Mind
always wants more so chasing after all
of that will never lead to Lasting
happiness so once I sort of started to
realize that I kind of gave up all of my
desires for accomplishment um and the
real Paradox there is that as I let go
of all of my goals I started to become
more successful and so instead of trying
to be something great I just focused on
you know small targets I sort of focused
on my spiritual practice I tried to
become a monk and take vows at the age
of like 22 and my teachers rejected me
so they said I said I'm ready to forsake
my life and they said you have nothing
worth giving up you have your life is
meaningless like you have nothing worth
giving up so go back to the United
States rise as high as you can finish a
doctoral degree actually get something
worth giving up and then at the age of
30 if you still want to take vows we'll
take you what situation must you have
been in at that point though before you
went off at sort of 21 years to that
ashram to be so prepared to give
everything up cuz cuz I heard that
reading through your story that you were
you had addictive behaviors at that
point already yeah so I I struggled a
lot with video game addiction um so I I
started playing video games when I was
very young and then in high school it
really started to impact my grades in
college I was basically playing video
games all day long instead of like going
to class and stuff like that like I
remember waking up the morning of my
Spanish final so this is my final exam
and then realizing that I like wasn't
very prepared for it so I just turned
off my alarm clock and went back to
sleep and therefore guaranteed failure
and so where I was mentally was just in
a really bad place so I I had all of
these goals and aspirations and I was so
frustrated with myself that I couldn't
bring myself to do what I wanted right
so I I I knew that I had to study more
every single day I would wake up and be
like I have to study more I have to
catch up I've fallen behind and so I'd
have all of these thoughts and no matter
how much I wanted something it seemed
like my body or my brain would just not
listen to me it Wanted the video game
more it wanted something else more and
so what I really was was in I had no
control over my life I was probably
depressed if I had seen a psychiatrist
I'm sure I would have gotten diagnosed
with something um brief periods of
suicidality basically waking up at noon
every day playing video games all day
long and I also remember like before I I
had to play to the point of absolute
exhaustion because if I put my head on
the pillow and I did not pass out all of
the thoughts that I was keeping at Bay
with the video games would come rushing
back about how I'm ruining my life day
after day after day after day and I was
just sort of sinking deeper and deeper
and like falling into a pit that I could
not climb out
of so the ashram in India tells you that
you can't give up your life what
happened then and why did you specialize
in psychiatric
so when I went to med school I mean when
I when I was in med school I was I still
had ego so I mean I still have ego now
but so I I was going to like like
combine Eastern medicine and sort of
focus on evidence-based complimentary
and alternative medicine and I was going
to be oncologist and be a real doctor
and save lives but what I really found
is that in med school um a couple of
things one
is my my favorite organ was the mind so
what I fell in love with in India was
the mind and sort of the internal sense
of self and all this kind of stuff so I
I really liked that and then I think
that my people were in Psychiatry so the
other thing that happened is I was
trying to decide between internal
medicine and oncology and Psychiatry and
so one of my mentors in med school told
me like do this so do one month of each
and then just ask yourself which one do
you enjoy more so on the one hand when I
was thinking about oncology this was
also chasing a desire right I had this
idea that I wanted to be a real doctor
right cuz those are like I want to cure
cancer like that's like let's let's be
like a real solid doctor and do that and
then what I noticed was that now what
internal medicine has become is very
like sitting in front of a computer so
when you work in a hospital like eight
hours of the day I'm sitting in front of
a computer and you spend very little
time with your patients and then over
time I started to to realize that like
Psychiatry is the only field of medicine
that we're losing the war in so if you
look at Medical outcomes for things like
bypass surgery and stuff like that those
are really good and this is really
insane to really think about so we can
take your body stepen and we can give
you a heart from a different human being
we can give you a kidney from a
different human being we can give you a
liver from a different human being if
you have a part of your body that
doesn't work we can literally rip it out
of you stick in a new one and you will
survive so outcomes in every field of
medicine are improving except for mental
health so mental health is the one area
where addictions are getting worse
depression is getting worse suicidality
is getting worse and this is in spite of
ADV an es in Neuroscience so something
has happened where we've missed
something about the mind and everyone is
getting sicker so like this was the
problem that really attracted me and
this isn't about my desire this is sort
of where we introduce a concept of
Dharma or Duty so I recognize that I'm
lucky I I'm I'm this kid who got to
spend seven years studying to become a
monk in India so I travel back and forth
but I spent my Summers there so I had
this really unique perspective and then
I got to train at Harvard Medical school
and what am I supposed to do with this
knowledge right like this is 15 years
that I've devoted to understanding how
human beings work and like I had this
very kind of you know Chic Private
Practice in Boston where I worked with
very very successful people and helped
them achieve and then I sort of realized
like that's not what I'm here for right
so I've gotten 15 years to learn all of
this stuff and like there's no shortage
of people lining up to help CEOs with
their mental health there's absolutely a
shortage people helping TW 25-year-old
incels who are like on the internet who
everyone wants to throw in jail because
they're very hateful and misogynistic
and things like that so I sort of
realized that like okay like this is
what I'm supposed to do so I'm going to
do it okay so I've got a big question
but before I just to te up that big
question you said you had this practice
in Boston where you working with sort of
high profile individuals Etc what is the
full spectrum of individuals that you've
spent time working with on a one-onone
one basis with threey your practice I
worked with people out of MIT incubators
CEOs entrepreneurs things like that so a
lot of high performance people but then
I've also worked with like losers let's
say so this is also more intensely this
is everything from 25-year-old kid who's
living in this mom's basement playing
video games all day two people who are
even homeless um so I worked with like
basically like the whole spectrum and
yeah you used the word losers there and
you did little air quotes for anyone
that can't see you um right now I'm
really interested when you talked about
in cells as well whether the way Society
is and the way that we're heading in
terms of clarity over what it is to be a
man has had any impact
on those people that you refer to as
incels like I'm I'm you know like
because we now have this digital world
that we can live our lives in as a
distraction from The Real World and
there's now more confusion than ever
over what it is to be a man and the role
of a man in a you know and then we look
at the stats around suicidality and I
think in Europe the biggest killer of
men under the age of 45 is themselves
currently is the shifting idea of what
it is to be a man having an impact on
people's sense of self and their purpose
100% so there's a there's a crisis
that's going on in men and people think
that this is new but I don't think it's
new it's always been there so if you
look at like you know even 50 60 years
ago 80% of
suicides are still going to be men so
historically men have been killing
themselves for like 100 years and no
one's been paying attention we're just
noticing now because the problem seems
to be getting worse so there's a couple
of things that are really interesting to
understand so one is that if we look at
what technology is doing to our brains
the first thing that it's doing is it is
externalizing our attention so if you
look back like let's say a thousand
years ago as human beings we spent a lot
more time with ourselves so let's say
that you and I go out hunting and then
let's say you shoot an arrow at a deer
and you miss and then I shoot an arrow
at a deer and I hit so in this moment
I'm superior to you and then we pick up
the deer and we're carrying it back and
then we have about two or three hours to
take that emotional insult and we kind
of process it we just give our mind
space to process it which it does
automatically now if you look at what
happens in people's days they don't
actually have any time to process what
happens to them because we are so
constantly distracted by external things
so I I don't know if you're like this
but I was in this point where I was
idiotically efficient so I would wake up
in the morning and I would listen to a
podcast while I'm like doing my exercise
or whatever and then even when I'm
cooking I'm listening to a lecture and
then like when I'm walking to the train
I have ear uh you know earbuds in and
I'm listening to a lecture there on the
train I'm reading I wanted my life to be
completely efficient I didn't want to
waste a single moment I literally listen
to the news in the shower it's right so
we don't want to waste time and so if
you really think about it where's the
attention of your mind your mind is
pointed outside of you and so then what
happens is once we do not pay attention
to ourselves we lose sight of our
internal signals literally in the same
way that if you raise a child in a dark
cave the the photo receptors in their
eyes won't develop they will atrophy so
any anything that the Mind does not get
access to will start to atrophy if I
don't practice Spanish I'm going to
forget Spanish the mind is very brain is
a very efficient organ so as we
externalize our attention we lose sight
of our internal signals we don't know
who we are anymore and now if I don't
know who I
am how do I figure out who I'm supposed
to be I pay attention to the outside
where are the answers they're on the
outside so this person is talking about
masculinity this person is talking about
what it means to be a man this person is
talking about what it means to be a man
and now since I don't have any internal
source of information I'm trying to
figure out what it means to be a man
from the outside world and this is when
men get truly because what it
means to be a man we getting all kinds
of mixed signals so on the one hand it
means being physically fit on the other
hand it means being a provider on one
hand it means having sex with as many
women as you can find on the other hand
it means having sex with um just one
woman and being a really solid man and
being a good father and then there's
also people telling us that being a man
means that you're right that you're
toxic that your testosterone level makes
you violent that you're evil that you're
privileged that there's a patriarchy all
the kind of stuff so we're we're getting
all this information from the outside
about what it means to be a man and so
the other like there are all kinds of
interesting ramifications of this so men
in today's society are not allowed to
complain so if you complain and you're a
successful person or a privileged person
everyone is going to think you're
arrogant everyone is going to think oh
my God who's this guy this guy
doesn't know what my life is like how
does he have any right to complain and
even your mind will tell you this you'll
look at these people you'll be like yeah
I don't have a right to complain but now
we need to stop for a second and think
about what it does to your psychology
when you as a human being are not
allowed to articulate your suffering
I've worked with people who have grown
up in abusive households where children
will say to their parents Mommy Daddy
I'm hurting and the the parent smacks
them across the face how dare you you're
so lucky you don't realize the
sacrifices I make for you it's
traumatizing to the child when they say
I am suffering and no one listens this
is what we're doing to the generation of
men people are saying I am suffering for
a hundred years men have been killing
themselves 80% of suicides are men the
most dangerous thing for a man under 45
is themselves and these people have been
literally killing themselves because no
one has been listening to them so in the
same way that you grow up with a as a
child in a household that's abusive
where no one takes you seriously no one
listens to your suffering and now we
even have successful men who are not
allowed to complain so the psychological
impact is the same anytime you have a
human being who is suffering in some way
and they cannot find connection with
another human being they cannot find
compassion with another human being that
person is going to feel isolated and if
you look at the statistics on suicide
it's very interesting so the number one
thing that correlates with male suicide
is not depression and this is super
scary there's one study I saw recently
that suggests that 50% of men who kill
themselves have no history or evidence
of mental illness and this I I believe
this statistic in in my clinical
practice because I know what depression
looks like I know what bipolar disorder
looks like and half the men that I've
worked with at least
are not actually mentally ill see mental
illness means a pathology of the mind
which means that the mind is
malfunctioning most of the suicidal men
that I work with they're not ma their
mind isn't malfunctioning they genuinely
have a life that is no longer worth
living they're looking at things in
objectively realizing that there's no
way out of the situation so they turn to
Suicide so I know it's kind of like a
very controversial statement but I think
that's what my clinical practice has
shown and there's some research to even
back that up so if we sort of look at
what's going on with men were sort of
they have nowhere to turn to and the
number one thing that correlates with it
is not Mental Illness but is a sense of
thwarted belongingness so this is kind
of like fact uh multivariate regression
analysis but basically what happens is
what causes people to kill themselves is
they try to connect with others and they
get rejected so it's specifically a very
specific research term called thwarted
belongingness so I try to belong to a
group and that group or multiple groups
usually will will thwart my attempts to
join the tribe to join the community and
this is what actually correlates a lot
with
suicidality so what's going on with men
right now is that we really don't allow
them to suffer you know because then
you're not manly and we're so
externalized with our attention that
we're not connecting with ourselves and
so we're looking to other people to tell
us what it means to be a man but that
may or may not work for you right that
may have been what worked for them so
then we kind of get into this problem
where we're disconnected from ourselves
and then like the world doesn't accept
us we're not allowed to suffer and
that's what creates the problem what is
the remedy to this so I think the first
thing is we must reconnect with
ourselves right so when you're kind of
saying like why do does everyone think
oh I I need to like achieve this and I
need to make this money and things like
that where did you learn that you should
do all that you learned all that from
the outside Instagram Instagram right so
we get we get fed all of these ideas
because if you look at all these
influencers what are they doing they're
never crying
they're smiling some of them will even
pay very attractive women to take
pictures with them well some of them are
crying but they're crying and uploading
it for ulterior motives right absolutely
and I think a lot of them are genuinely
suffering too but then it's it's also
like I mean there's all kinds of weird
stuff going on so one thing is like
people say that men we don't allow men
to be emotional nowadays but say people
say oh men are allowed to cry so this is
something that I experienced even in my
marriage where we allow men to cry but
we don't allow men to be angry but why
is it are men no longer allowed to be
angry you just think about it for a
second so anger is just a completely
normal emotion right but if I'm in a
situation where I'm in an argument with
my wife and I feel emotion a and I
express emotion a and she feels emotion
B and she expresses emotion be these two
things should be equal right we as both
human beings get to express what we feel
now in the case of me expressing anger
and her expressing sadness she's crying
and I'm yelling suddenly I've become a
villain it's so interesting I saw a
viral tweet yesterday it was someone
Googling my wife is yelling at me what
should I do and then my husband is
yelling at me what should I do when they
Googled my husband is yelling at me what
should I do domestic violence help line
comes up as like a Google um popup when
you Google my wife is yelling at me what
should I do nothing comes up yeah
because obviously as you said in the
case of villainization I know that most
domestic violence comes from men but
it's it's interesting that we see the
emot we interpret the emotions entirely
differently because of that absolutely
right so we as a society will say like
oh men men need to be in touch with
their emotions but not anger and then
this is what really screws men because
as men we are socialized and conditioned
to only feel anger this is the only
emotion you're allowed to feel as a man
growing up and this is the one emotion
that gets demonized when you're older so
I'll give you a simple example so like I
used to get bullied a lot right so when
I get bullied in school like what am I
supposed to do Stephen in school well it
depends if you can fight back absolutely
right it's fighting back like you didn't
say talk to the teacher you didn't say
ask for help you didn't say cry about it
because if I cry about it what's going
to happen Stephen you're going to get
bullied more absolutely so we turn every
emotion so men experience anger is
something called an umbrella motion we
literally suppress and are conditioned
to suppress all other emotions except
for anger and then if you talk to men
about their experience of Life anger is
always the first thing that comes out of
their mouth someone breaks up with you
how do you feel about it do you feel
ashame no that's not what we say I feel
pissed off how could she do this to me
and then we vent that anger on the
internet and then this turns into
misogyny right and then we get demonized
for it and it's not that there
isn't we should be harshly judged if we
act on those kinds of emotions I'm not
saying that that's the case but what we
also need to consider is that the men
who are saying these kinds of toxic
things are saying that for a reason this
is because of their upbringing this is
because of the world that they lived in
right so we're conditioned to only
experience anger even sadness gets
turned into anger shame gets turned into
anger fear gets turned into anger right
so if I'm afraid of something happening
what do I need I man up get angry right
like let's go son let's go this is the
emotion that we tap into to overcome
fear so we don't feel any of those other
emotions and we're left only feeling
anger at the the very heart of
aggression um I heard someone say to me
once that at the very heart of
aggression is some kind of insecurity
but for men when they encounter that
insecurity they only know how to sort of
manifest it as aggression so I wouldn't
agree with the first thing that at the
heart of all anger is insecurity but I
would absolutely agree with the second
thing that the way that we the only way
we know how to respond is with anger
because here's the exact quote just
found it the source of aggression is
insecurity as we are consciously aware
that our position in life is never
secure people feel in increasingly
insecure and helpless so they will be
increasingly aggressive and
confrontational at a personal and a
social level so let's tunnel down into
that for a second okay so I think that
that is true on some level but also I
would disagree so the first thing is
that we have parts of our brain even
animals feel anger but I think that like
when two dogs are fighting over
territory I don't think that that's born
of some kind of identity of insecurity
right so if we really look at like The
evolutionary purpose of anger this is my
opinion is that anger is the emotion
that we feel to protect our territory
it's a protective emotion so if I slap
you across the face what's the first
thing that you're going to feel it's
going to be anger so if I insult you
you're going to feel angry it it's
fascinating the way that it works so
anger causes our thoughts to be faster
anger causes our peripheral vision to
collapse to 30° so I only see what's in
front of to me and it also makes me less
uh sensitive to pain so like my no
receptors will actually like start to be
suppressed when I feel angry right so if
I get into a fight I'm going to feel it
tomorrow but like while I'm getting hit
I'm not going to feel it so I don't
think it's born of all insecurity I
think anger is simply an evolutionary
response it it's it's something that we
experience to protect ourselves that's
why we feel angry right so if I attack
Baby Bear Mama Bear is going to come out
angry so it's it's really a protective
emotion now I agree with the second part
of the statement 100% that when we feel
insecure especially as men the only way
we are taught to deal with our problems
is through anger right so if I'm feeling
insecure if I'm feeling ashamed of
myself if someone's bullying me what do
I do I put them in their place right I
don't try to make peace I don't complain
to someone because no one's going to
take me seriously right I have to stand
up for myself so we've got the first
point there about how we remedy this
challenge which is about self-expression
more self expression that's what I heard
not self-expression introspection
introspection getting to know ourselves
right so so it's very simple so if you
look at your idea of what it means to be
a man what percentage of that idea comes
outside of you and what percentage of
that idea comes from within you about
90% comes from outside of me and that's
why 90% of people we're 90% right
so and if you look and I'm sure you know
this and you've probably done this too
if you look at where is the goodness in
your life where does it come from
Stephen it doesn't come from what what
other people have told you they may have
told you something but then you looked
within yourself and then you found that
to be true yeah the goodness in you the
motivation the really good motivation in
you not chasing things but the the duty
that you have you know everything that
you really strive for all that good
stuff comes from inside you and the
problem is that we live in a world that
pulls our attention away from ourselves
what do you think of Andrew taism then
so as a general rule I don't comment on
people that I don't speak to mhm so what
what tell me the features of what you're
talking about okay so the recent wave
of Internet masculine influencers who
have like Bugattis and lots of women and
sports cars and there's there's many of
them there's many of them and they seem
to be resonant for some kind of Reason
um that are kind of saying that the way
to become be a man is to have loads of
money lots of women these kind of cars
physical strength and there just this
huge sort of generation of young
typically men that are now Disciples of
that religion yeah so I think if you
dislike that toxic masculinity what we
need to understand is it's the people
who hate that toxic masculinity that are
driving these people to towards it so I
know this is kind of crazy so what's
happened is this is grown right and as
it's grown what have we done we've
demonized these people we've said these
people are bad and as we demonize them
what's happened they've grown stronger
so this is something that's very
important to understand if you are a man
and you say I am suffering today what is
the response that you're going to get
shut up absolutely not in those exact
words but that's whatever the words are
that's what they mean now I want us to
be very very careful right so if you
listening to step say people tell you to
shut up and your first thought as a
listener is no that's not true that's
the problem so e if people agree with
you they understand what you're saying
but if they disagree with you that's the
problem
you we literally have a man who is
telling telling us right now that your
experience is when I say I'm suffering
people tell you to shut up and then
people are going to be judging you for
saying that and they're going to be
saying no that's not true they're going
to be saying shut up
absolutely right so this is exactly the
problem so men are struggling right now
and that the rest of the world says no
you're not you're privileged you're a
man there's a patriarchy and I'm not
commenting on the sociology of it there
is a patriarchy whatever there's men
have many advantages in life I've
experienced many advantages of being a
man it's absolutely true I'm not let's
not go there I'm talking about the
individual experience of men so there is
one group of people on the planet who
says yes your life does suck and that's
these toxic masculine people they're the
only people that truly validate men's
experiences because everyone else says
why are you complaining and these guys
say yeah you're a loser what are
you going to do about it they at least
meet you where you're at and they say
yes your life is hard and I will show
you a way to make it better whereas the
rest of the world says no your life
isn't hard what are you complaining
about and I've seen this as a doctor
I've seen patients who are complaining
about pain women who are complaining
about pain because they have an internal
bleed within the wall of their uterus
that cannot get detected and they're
saying I'm hurting I'm hurting I'm
hurting and we ignore this person's pain
and that's when things go bad so for
years and years and years we have
ignored the struggles of men and there's
one group on the planet who accepts them
with open arms and the more that we
demonize them so when someone starts
believing in this toxic masculinity what
is the response do people ever ask like
help me understand what your life is
like like what do you like about this
person because everyone's going to them
for a reason but we never we never
bother to ask why are you listening to
this person what does this mean to you I
see these we see these posts all the
time in our community my boyfriend is
getting into this stuff my son is
getting this stuff how do I stop it hold
on a second don't try to stop it
understand it first because everyone's
trying to stop it and no one is
bothering to listen to what the
experience of these men men are and
that's why it's getting worse and worse
and worse as we try to stop it so if I'm
the mother of a son who is watching a
lot of these sort of toxic male
influences
online what would be a better approach
versus just Banning the computer and
telling them that that's toxic and not
to look at it help me understand what
you like about this what is it like to
be in today's day and age how do you
feel about yourself how does it feel
knowing that 70 to 80% of women want you
to make more money than them and yet 60%
of people who graduate from college are
women so men are faced are living in a
world today where there are are
impossible expectations to
meet and
so like what is it like to be someone
who fundamentally has no chance at
success right these are the kinds of
things that you need to say to these
people you need to give them an
alternate place to go where they can be
heard and helped supported and
understood see anytime we make a
judgment our mind already has a
conclusion there's nothing left to learn
anytime we're judgmental so what do we
what do we do to all these people who
are toxic men we even create the word
toxic we literally label them as bad in
some way and I'm not saying that the
behavior isn't toxic but what I'm
pointing what I'm trying to point out is
that even in our language there is so
much harsh judgment so I once had a
patient we both just did it didn't we
absolutely so I once had a patient who
is smearing feces over the all over the
school so adolescent kid right and when
you have a kid who's literally taking a
and wiping it on the walls and
stuff what happens the kid gets punished
kid gets punished again and again and
again the one really sad thing is no one
ever asks why are you doing this what's
going on inside you because healthy kids
don't do this it's only kids whove been
traumatized in some way and as I've
worked with incels as I've worked with
people who are toxically masculine it
always starts with trauma and when I say
always this is a clinical experience but
I'm talking about 100% so 100% of people
start on this path by getting hurt in
some way by getting taken advantage of
in some way by sacrificing something and
not getting something in return and they
have their share of responsibility too
I'm not saying that they're Hess victims
but I think that people who are raised
with love and compassion and do have
connections don't go down this
road you're so passionate about this
aren't you because I feel like your eyes
have seen in your practice some pretty
heartbreaking things yeah I mean I think
it's
like see unless we are willing to be
what these people need they're going to
continue going down the toxic
masculinity route someone needs to start
offering these people safe haven no
matter what they say or not no matter I
think there should be consequences for
actions but
so this as someone who's worked in a
jail right so and this is what's kind of
interesting if you really think about it
people will judge me for talking to or
even trying to support people who are
toxically masculine and they're like oh
my God you're such an you're
giving these people a platform how could
you make the world a worst place and
then I tell them I worked for in a jail
for three months and they're like oh
look at you you're so compassionate
you're working with these people who are
like criminals and like oh my God we I
don't think they realize that anyone you
see on social media is 10 times better
than the people that I worked with in
jail these are people who are actual
pedophiles actual rapists right not just
talking about it maybe the people on
social media are too I don't know and so
it's really interesting the way that our
mind automatically judges things and so
if we really want to fix this problem
and I think we need to fix this problem
I it's just my take I mean I'm I'm not a
you know I'm a big fan of like
compassion and trying to support other
human beings I'm not saying that that's
always the right answer I think
sometimes you may need things like war
or violence or whatever I mean there may
be causes for it but generally speaking
I think that like demonizing these
people isn't working is there anything
else that we haven't covered in the
remedies to this sort of male crisis
we've talked about getting in more in
touch with yourselves is there anything
else do we need more positive role
models or is it really not about the
external at all no I mean so I think all
that stuff is true so we know that for
example like there's like a loneliness
crisis and things like that I think that
we all it's not just Role Models like we
need individual responsibility
so like for example everyone will say
yeah like I I know it's a real tragedy
that men don't have friends but it's not
my job to fix I will hear this from both
men and women that like it's a real
tragedy but it's not my responsibility
it's sad that this thing happened but
it's not my my which makes sense right
no no human being is responsible for
another human being but then the
question kind of becomes like okay let's
play that tape through to the end what
happens to that person whose
responsibility is it so if you look at a
lot of what's going on with men right
now it's loneliness it's isolation it's
touch starvation it's suicidality
sexlessness as well sexlessness and it's
it's no individual person's
responsibility but the real problem with
this is that these are not problems that
men can solve on their own this is
exactly why this is the problem that men
are experiencing because as men we are
taught to be independent we are taught
to be you should fix everything on your
own and so men have fixed all of the
things that we can fix on our own the
only thing that's left is the things
that we must rely on other people for
right so no one's complaining about you
know I mean a lot of men are obese but
there's not like an obesity there is a
crisis but that's not what's bothering
people that's not where we're losing the
war we're not losing the war on baldness
right so there are lots of things as a
man that you can fix in your own life
it's just the real challeng is that no
one is willing to take responsibility
for any level of connection with men and
so that's not something that is going to
get fixed because you need another human
being to hug you like you can't hug
yourself it just doesn't work so I and
my area of focus tends to be on
introspection because I think that's
like really really powerful but there's
all kinds of other stuff that's
important mentorship role models all
that kind of stuff but I think
ultimately through introspection you can
attain complete peace no matter who you
are what your what your path is
circumstances I think it's kind of like
the Silver Bullet which is what the
budha discovered so are you saying there
that as a society we should take on more
of the responsibility for some of these
big fundamental issues that that men and
people in crisis can't solve for
themselves subtly no not a society
because as a society who's part no I
mean you I mean your in L listeners as
individuals need to take responsibility
and it's not that you you have to take
responsibility it's not fair to you to
be responsible for someone else but
unless any everyone who is listening to
this podcast goes out and literally hugs
a man no one else is going to do it
because if you don't do it who's going
to do it you can't rely on society we've
been relying on societ soet to fix the
problem it's not working Society can't
do so you're saying me forget
Society don't don't wait for government
to have some kind of intervention how's
it working out not great I mean this the
direction of travel as it relates to
these sort of key issues like loneliness
are only getting worse and worse
suicidality seems to be getting worse
and worse M now you've got this young
generation of women as well that are um
exploding in their suicidality yes young
women I think it's the fastest growing
group at the moment if my stats are
correct
yeah so we have one really interesting
thing is that that men and women are
becoming more equal in many ways but
unfortunate in unfortunate ways so
female suicidality is getting worse um
we're also seeing like male body
dysmorphia On The Rise and I suspect
it's way worse than we realize but I
think that what we're starting to see is
less of a discrepancy in gender related
health issues so the the things that
used to be predominantly men are now
women are catching up which is a bad
thing and things that were predominantly
women now men are catching up so body
dysmorphia in men addictions in women
are on the Rise um so I and and yeah so
there's things are getting worse what
explains that specifically the the
suicidality in young women I hear so
social media is a leading cause of that
but yeah so I think if we look at it
it's not just social media so I think
what's happened is that the fundamental
day of a man and W and a woman I believe
I don't know if this is factually
correct is getting closer and closer so
like you know women are working now men
are working now like dating is hard like
being on Tinder sucks if you're a dude
or a woman for different reasons um we
get we have a lot of technological
influence so like everyone's kind of
getting screwed and we're all kind of
getting screwed together and just
because things are getting bad or worse
for men and men are in crisis does not
has no relation to the fact that women
are struggling for a whole different set
of reasons so there's plenty of biases
that I see as a psychiatrist there's
biases against men in psychiatrist
there's biases against women in
Psychiatry I think one of the biggest
mistakes that we make is that we seem to
think that it's like a pendulum where
it's like if we're biased against men we
can't also be biased against women but I
think both groups can suffer at the same
time
catastrophically and they are yeah I
want to talk about the role of social
media your book is called how to raise a
healthy gamer and when I think about
gaming I think some people think about
it like holding a controller and being a
I don't know a character in a video game
or shooting something or whatever but
many of these social media apps are
almost indistinguishable from gaming in
many respects so the role of social
media in our mental health in the modern
world um good bad and
different so bad right now so let's
understand something so social media and
technology is kind of like introducing
an invasive species so there's no
there's no checks and balances right now
so I don't think gaming is evil so so I
I struggled with video game addiction I
play video games with my kids now so the
the main problem with social media and
technology is that it's completely
unregulated and we don't know how to
fight against it so what's happening
right now is especially if you look at
social media is that like it is
affecting our brains and we're outgunned
so if you kind of like look at for
example we're talking about masculinity
right and what's my antidote to that
it's introspection so if we sort of look
at these yogic or meditative skills as
we train ourselves in these skills we
will become impervious to the negative
effects of Technology
the problem is that these things are so
good at literally shaping our thoughts
so as an example if we look at social
media you know body dysmorphia and
insecurity about the way that we feel
about ourselves can lead to things like
suicidality okay so as we look at you
know all these pretty people on social
media you look at all these people who
are not normal right so social media
will show you the prettiest people and
so we start as I see pretty face after
pretty face after pretty face I start to
think that that is normal my brain makes
this calculation and then I start to
feel ugly so I this results in body
dysmorphia so if we sort of look at that
the more we see pretty things the more
that we have fomo because everyone is
having fun right if I log on to Facebook
or Instagram this person is having a
birthday party this person is having
every every time I log on everyone is
having a blast but this is 365 people
who each have one birthday party I get
one birthday party a year but anytime I
look at in social media it seems like
everyone is always having fun it's not
everyone it's just one person is having
fun today one person is having fun
tomorrow everyone just gets one birthday
a year but when we see it we see
everyone's having fun and I'm not having
fun so this makes us feel bad about
ourselves so what is the antidote to
that so in the yogic tradition we have
this concept of a hump God or ego so you
have particular meditative practices
that help you dissolve your ego and
essentially what social media does is
amplifies our ego makes us feel really
bad about ourselves remember that one of
the key marks is comparison of ego so
social media induces a lot of comparison
so as we train our mind we will become
free from those problems so if I learn
how to dissolve my ego then social media
is not a
problem easier said than done absolutely
you even said that you've still got an
ego
100% and you've done all this practice
and you've still got an ego yeah have
you dissolved it at all oh absolutely so
I mean it's it's way smaller than it
used to be but even to say that I have
completely dissolved my ego is an
egotistical statement so this is a this
is a battle that I will never win and
I've just accepted that right so I'm
there's no way to win I'm not going to
become enlightened in this day and age
so I'm just going to do the best that I
can and I'll never succeed that's okay
there's so many shocking stats that kind
of links to two things we've talked
about here around connection and
relationships um I think we all know
intuitively now especially with all the
research and data that's come out how
important relationships are for mental
health gaming social media the digital
world The Vision Pro I bought one
yesterday virtual reality augmented
reality as we head more towards these
digital
worlds are you concerned at all that
we're losing sight of connection and I I
sit that in in comparison or alongside
the stats that we know about sexlessness
people having less sex marriage is
seeming to get um worse and worse and
more difficult the direction of travel
here doesn't feel like it's very
optimistic
yeah it's not and and what what do we do
about that did you do you think we just
become gurus and leave the digital world
and the Western World and try and escape
and take our kids with us I had someone
talk talk to me about that idea no so I
don't think so right so so my book is
how to be a how to raise a healthy gamer
what I believe is that the these things
are only evil if we don't know how to
deal with them so what's happened is
human beings have created fire for the
first time but we don't know how to
control fire so we don't don't need to
run away from technology we just need to
get better at dealing with it and
getting better at dealing with it is
everything from maybe government
regulation or whatever to even training
our like personal sense of self so if
you sort of look at like why your
relationship is decaying it's for a
number of reasons the first is that see
Human Relationships evolutionarily were
predicated on the fact that humans
needed each other for survival so
fundamentally what has always bound
human beings together is like I need you
and you need me otherwise we're not
going to survive but what's happening in
the world today is we no longer need
each other for survival so I never even
need to leave my house I can order
groceries I can order food I can work
from home I can literally stay in my
home or in my room and I never need to
walk out of the house I never need to
interact with someone so once you remove
necessity from the equation as to why
human beings form
relationships so we're seeing a decay in
relationships because we no longer need
each other right so women no longer need
men you can have an indep dependent Life
as a man you no longer need a woman you
can get a Fleshlight if you want to you
can have an AI girlfriend you have
pornography you don't you don't we don't
need each other and yet the the human
mind is the only organ of the body that
in order for be it to be healthy it
requires another human being so we don't
need our heart can be healthy without
another human kidneys can be healthy
liver can be healthy our whole body can
be healthy except for the brain and
except for the mind we need someone else
to be mentally healthy so now what we're
going to have to do is Society is evolve
we're going to have to start to realize
that we don't need relationships anymore
in order to survive but without them we
will all suffer and so what we need to
do is evolve as humans and I think part
of that is like learning some of these
yogic and meditation skills so that we
can resist the influences the negative
influences of Technology but that also
means prioritizing relationships even
when we don't need to do you think they
should teach these skills in school the
yog % it would be a good time to
intervene wouldn't it yes 100% And I've
taught these kids uh these these skills
to kids and it's amazing how quickly
they pick it up it's hard for me and you
to learn because we're already formed
but just like a language like if you
teach it to a child I'll teach you know
like I I'll you know I taught infants to
meditate my own children I taught them
to meditate when they were like two what
does that mean what are what are these
skills if you were trying to teach a
grown-up like me where would you begin
so I'll tell you where I began with my
kids and then we'll yeah so let's
understand what meditation is so
meditation is controlling the attention
of your mind so if I tell my mind to
focus on this it's going to focus on
this so if we look at meditation there
are a couple of key steps the first is
ignoring impulses so if I tell my mind
to focus on this object it will have an
Impulse to focus on something else so we
have to train the mind to stop thinking
about other things so I teach this to my
four-year-old in a very fun way I tell
her to lay down down on the ground and
we play this game called sniffer gobler
where I'm a monster called a sniffer
gobler and she has to be perfectly still
so the sniffer gobler is going to try to
get her to move and if she moves then
she gets gobbled so this becomes a game
so I'm kind of trying to get her to move
I'm tickling her a little bit I'm
sniffing or whatever I'm playing some
kind of game with her and she's being
perfectly rigid because it's part of a
game so what's going on in her brain In
This Moment there's as I tickle her
there's an Impulse to move the
peripheral body is sending nervous
signals to the brain let's move let's
let's shift let's do something let's
let's do something but her frontal loes
in that moment are learning to restrain
her mind and literally control her
impulses so this is Step number one is
stop your
impulses you can learn this very simply
by for example I would recommend for
someone like you a practice called
trataka so trataka is fixed Point gazing
so you take a candle and you look you
gaze at the candle without blinking so
the first 10 seconds will be easy but
then you'll start to get signals let's
blink let's blink let's blink let's
blink it's going to start to burn
they're going to start to tear up you
probably won't get hurt don't worry
about it safe practice um because then
your eyes will start to water and
they'll lubricate which is usually what
our eyelids need to do and so you'll
start to have tears but then you focus
your mind and now what you're literally
doing is controlling your impulses your
restraining your impulses so that's the
first step of meditation is to not let
your mind wander into a thousand
different things now if you do this one
practice which is not even real
meditation your life will be transformed
so you will literally it's like lift
weights for self-control so now you're
sitting down to to eat a meal 11: p.m
rolls around you have those Cravings but
if you've done thoa your frontal lobes
will be strengthened and as your frontal
loes become strengthened you are able to
resist your impulses you will gain
control over yourself that's step one
just resist your impulses this is
usually why meditation practices involve
sitting and focusing and like not moving
even the second step is a little bit
different there's a difference between
avoiding distraction and then pushing my
mind to focus on a different thing so
then for example what I'll do with my my
daughter is I'll tell her to chant M and
maximize the feeling of vibration in
your chest so now what she's doing is
she's attuned to her body she's chanting
M and then she's trying to maximize the
vibration So In This Moment she's using
something to focus the attention of her
mind because her mind is fully on the
chest and feeling that vibration and
then she's kind of experimenting a
little bit but she's really tuned in and
that trains our mind to focus on one
thing so these are steps number one and
two so the first thing you've got to do
is avoid impulses and distractions and
the second thing is teach your mind how
to sit on one thing and don't go any
anywhere
else that's step one and two and then
you'll be ready for meditation and what
is meditation so medit the word
meditation in English has three Sanskrit
words that get translated into
meditation DH and samti so dhana is
technically a focusing technique it's
something that you do so I can tell you
gaze at a candle flame without blinking
this is a DH it is a focusing technique
this is what's confusing for a lot of
people the second uh word for meditation
is Dian so danan is not something you
can do it's a state of mind so I'll
explain this very simply do you know how
to go to sleep me no I mean well I go to
bed and I lay lay down and EV I usually
put something on so I can listen to as I
fall asleep how I sleep no how should I
sleep pretend I don't know how to sleep
can you teach me how to
sleep go to the bedroom um make sure
it's nice and cold okay lay there in the
bed and close your eyes Okay and wish
for the best so I I laid there and I
closed my eyes I have a blanket over me
it's cold and I'm not asleep yet what am
I doing wrong what do I need to do to go
to sleep maybe you're not tired enough
have you slept before yeah have you done
it a lot yeah but you can't tell me how
to do it not really no absolutely so
sleep is a state of consciousness so
going to bed is something that you do
and then sleep happens to you this is
the biggest misunderstanding about
meditation everyone's focused on
meditation techniques these are dhas if
you are in a dhar as you gaze at the
candle for an extended period of time
your mind will enter a state of
consciousness in the same way that you
enter sleep but you can't control it you
can't do it you can't evoke it you just
have to create the right environment and
then the Consciousness will trigger the
closest thing that many people
experience is the Flow State but even in
the Flow State there is mental activity
so the flow state is like the early
stage of meditation and then after you
enter danan which is a state of
consciousness which is of no mind so you
have awareness but you have no thoughts
no emotions you're just simply aware the
best example of this that that some
people have experienced a couple of
things one is orgasm the moment of
orgasm is one where you have no thoughts
thoughts come afterward thoughts come
before but in that moment of orgasm you
are aware you are present you are
Blissful but you have no thoughts or no
mental activity sometimes also like
looking at the sun like watching a
sunset walking along the beach there's
some moments where you're present you're
not really thinking about anything but
you're not asleep you're not daydreaming
this is what Beyond is this is the
second state meditation after you sit in
Dean for a while then you will attain
something called samadi so these are the
transcendental states of meditation this
is the kind of stuff that psychedelics
does to you so when you enter these Sami
States this is when you start to get
transformed and all this weird stuff
that's very hard to describe so I would
say that meditation is these three
things it's a focusing technique
followed by a state of consciousness
that fingers crossed get induced and
once you're in that state then you can
kind of start climbing and what impact
has has it had on your life
transform it completely changeed my life
I mean I I used to be a 25-year-old kid
with nothing to show for it and now
arguably I'm successful right so I'm an
entrepreneur I'm a Harvard trained
psychiatrist I have a clinical practice
I'm a dad I'm a content creator and it's
like I'm the same kid that was failing
out of college like I haven't changed
the only difference between the loser
and the successful person which neither
of those are true by the way those are
both manifestations of ego I'm neither a
loser nor am I successful these are
external trappings but fundamentally I'm
the same person that I've always been
and the only difference is that
meditation taught me how to control this
thing it's like when you're living life
it's like you're playing a video game
and the controller is unplugged so the
character on the screen does whatever
the it wants to and you're trying
to send its signals but it's not
listening to you so what meditation is
is the process of plugging in your
controller so that you start controlling
the instrument of your life you
understand how your body works you
understand how your mind works you
understand where your desires come from
you understand how to conquer them you
understand what your ego is you
understand all of these kinds of things
and meditation is what helped me do that
the thing with meditation that the sort
of instant rebuttal is I tried it and it
didn't work or I tried it and I can't
stop myself from thinking about things
that's like what I hear all the time oh
I can't meditate I tried it my B my
brain's too busy okay great so let's
reot those as i' I've helped at least a
thousand people overcome this so let's
understand a couple of
fundamentals see if you've tried
meditation it didn't work for you it's
not your problem and it's not that
meditation doesn't work for you it's
that you had a crappy teacher so if we
understand okay like this is something
that we how do people learn how to
meditate they hear a podcast like this
and then they go sit in their room at
some point and then they close their
eyes and try and think of nothing and it
doesn't work so they stop okay great so
like who is their teacher the dire of a
CEO right but this is what I mean so so
the quality of meditation teaching has
degraded so profoundly everyone has
mindfulness apps what's your teacher
it's an app yeah so if I were to say
like okay like you know Stephen you're a
pretty crappy surgeon but you've never
gone to medical school how would you
expect to ever be a decent surgeon
unless you literally had people teach
you so there are a couple of things that
I learned how to meditate because I had
expert teachers the reason that I teach
meditation successfully is because I'm a
decent teacher I'm not even the best
teacher out there so a couple of things
to say about meditation one is that
there are 112 meditation techniques one
of which will work very naturally for
every person on the planet okay so the
number one reason that people suck at
meditation is because we're not teaching
them the right kind of meditation as a
simple example so I have patients with
ADHD and I try I teach them very
successfully to meditate now a lot of
these patients when they come to me they
say meditation doesn't work for me
because I can't get my mind to slow down
and focus on one thing it always wanders
to which I say that's great no problem
we're going to teach you meditation
that's going to feel so easy for you so
let me ask you this if I if I've got a
kid okay who's running around and I want
my kid to sit still how do I get the kid
to sit
still how do people typically do that
they shout they Shout at the kid okay so
the kid sit still for a little while
then what happens runs off again
absolutely so how do I get a kid to sit
still when does a child
sit when it's playing a game okay so we
can engage it in some way so like if
like this is why I don't know if you've
seen this but airports that'll have like
these little play places so the best way
to get a child to sit down is to tell to
run you run go to the playground go to
the playground for an hour and then
what'll what'll the child do naturally I
want to sit down so when I'm teaching my
patients with ADHD how to meditate I
don't tell them to slow down their mind
I tell them to move it as fast as you
can so I'll literally take my my
patients to a cafeteria and we sit in
the cafeteria and I tell my patient you
have to pay attention to as many sounds
as you can is quickly as you can I want
you to hear every sound in the cafeteria
don't miss a single one don't pay
attention to what people are saying but
hear the words hear this sound hear this
sound hear this sound hear this sound so
what I'm really telling their their mind
to do is run instead of sit still
eventually what happens is they're
paying attention to sound number one
then sound number two sound number three
not fast enough faster you need to
listen to 10 sounds in three seconds go
faster go faster go faster go faster and
eventually the mind gets tired and then
the mind naturally sits down easiest
meditation in the world then they enter
Dian so what are they doing in DH
they're paying attention to sound number
one 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 and
then eventually the mind will calm down
it'll get exhausted and then they'll
enter the on and then they've learned to
meditate so I think the reason that
meditation doesn't work for people is
because they haven't tried the right
technique so you look like a guy who
exercises you exercise yeah how do you
exercise go to the gym lift the weights
okay what about running yeah sometimes
swimming no can't swim why not think
it's just a story I've told myself but I
just can't float okay great right so so
if all exercise was swimming you would
have concluded that exercise is not for
me but there are a thousand ways to
exercise because human beings are
different so you just have to find the
right kind of exercise for you and it's
fun for you people will look at you
they'll say I don't understand how you
exercise oh my God it's awful I
personally I hate lifting weights but I
love swimming I love hiking I love
rafting so learning how to meditate is
not about doing one particular tradition
and this is where there's a big problem
in the world today which is that most
meditation teachers just know their one
tradition and so if a student comes to
them and they don't do it right the
teacher tells them you need to keep
trying keep trying keep trying I've seen
very few meditation teachers say you
know what I'm not the teacher for you
this is not the right app for you you
should go use this different app because
based on your mind this is what what
will suit your mind we each have a
cognitive fingerprint and learning how
to meditate very easily is about
choosing the right meditation for your
cognitive
fingerprint and does meditation help us
with these addictions we've been talking
about social Med social media addictions
uh porn addictions you talk about as
well um gaming addictions I I think it I
I I would go as far as to say that it
conquers them all so that's kind of a a
grandio statement but if we really look
at what is an addiction an addiction is
two things it is a source of pleasure
and it is an antidote to pain so anytime
we look at any addiction so opium for
example gives me pleasure and it also
numbs out it shuts off the functioning
of my amydala and my lyic system video
games shut off my amydala and my lyic
system make my negative emotions go away
and release dopamine so we have dopamine
release and we have suppression of our
negative emotional circuitry all
addictions do this so if you sort of
look at it how do we why do we fall into
an addiction it's because we become
dependent on this dopamine surge on
giving into our wants right so our mind
says I want this thing and we can't
control that impulse when it wants
something I have to give it I can't
control it I'm too weak the other thing
that happens is that when anytime we
have pain we have to run away from it
but meditation is literally the process
of training those two skills so when I
have a want I learn to resist I want to
scratch my nose no scratching your nose
and what we sort of know from a
neuroscience standpoint is that we know
that meditation strengthens our frontal
loes and weak frontal loes are fertile
ground for addictions so we know that we
literally strengthen the parts of the
brain that will help you resist an
addiction from the pleasure side the
other cool thing about meditation is
that it makes us not impervious to pain
but we stop avoiding pain so you ask me
like am I nervous about how the book is
going to no if it's if it if it's if it
crashes and burns then I will be sad so
what right so I'm going to be sad will
I'll be sad forever well that depends on
whether I base my sense of identity on
this one book I'll be sad for some
amount of time and that Sadness by the
way is karmically what I bought when I
wrote the book and I think this is
something that a lot of people Miss but
the moment that I write the book I open
myself up to the pleasure of it being a
success and the pain of it being a
failure does that make sense so if I
really wanted to avoid the pain the only
solution is to not write the book in the
first place but that's not the way to
live life so meditation teaches us how
to tolerate pain how to accept pain and
then once you can accept pain oh my God
your life will become so much easier and
then something beautiful happens now I
don't have to use the Opium I don't I my
day job is an is as an addiction
psychiatrist so I teach this stuff to
people who are addicted to heroin and
Fentanyl and video games and stuff like
that it works for all of them not all of
them most of them and so meditation
absolutely helps because it it literally
strengthens the parts of our brain that
addictions prey
on and these are all addictions so like
food addictions and porn addictions
gaming addictions and social media
addictions so each addiction has a
slightly different manifestation but the
core aspect of providing pleasure and
taking away pain is true of all
addictions what what is the most popular
Addiction in your mind that the vast
majority of society are currently
um prayed to but don't really realize I
mean I reading through your book I think
phone
addiction which you talk about in
chapter 7 is maybe the thing that none
of us see as an addiction but we're
probably addicted if I look at my screen
time I Think Jesus CH most popular yeah
so I think phone addiction is really bad
I mean in a weird way I'd say this
doesn't really qualify as an addiction
but the biggest problem I think is is
our addiction to
success right so if we sort of think
about it like I I don't know if that's
kind of the context of the just where my
my mind goes but if we sort of think
about it everyone is using success as an
antidote to their pain and a source of
their pleasure and so here we are
chasing all of these things for success
for success for success but in terms of
like technology or like from a
psychiatric perspective I think phone is
probably at the top of the list I think
I've been quite confused about something
in my life but just generally because I
when I think about those young men that
are struggling or young women that are
struggling I often think what their life
is lacking is a sense of purpose and
ambition and something to strive for
this is kind of what we say but now I'm
kind of confused based on what you said
because is that what that there they're
missing do like you see a kid he's 22
years old he's in his mom's basement he
you know low self-esteem playing video
games all day doesn't respect himself
low self-worth in my head I used to
think okay well what that kid's need
what that kid needs is a big goal to
strive for fair enough so but let's
let's pay attention to your specific
language so she said what that kid needs
is purpose ambition and something to
strive for are those three things the
same no right so this is the big core of
the problem is this is why things get
modeled and this is why people get
confused because ambition is very
different from purpose they're like at
opposite ends of the spectrum if we look
at it from a scientific perspective the
number one thing that correlates or one
of the two most popular or two variables
that correlate the most with pornography
addiction is meaninglessness in life so
if you want to conquer your pornography
addiction you have to have a reason to
not jerk off and watch porn all day so
you have to have a life that like makes
it so that you just don't do that
because what happens is if you have a
empty life and your brain is kind of
sitting there and it's like okay we're
not doing anything anyway so let me get
some dopamine like let's just do that
and that's how people become addicted to
pornography is there correlation there
between when people masturbate and what
they're going through in their life
absolutely so so it's not even
masturbation pornography addiction but
what we find is that the more emotional
the more their amygdala and libic system
gets activated the more pornography they
will use so the more negative emotion
you experience the more pornography you
will watch why because I want dopamine
no no so this is where it avoids the
pain so pornography shuts off our
experience of negative emotions it's not
even the pleasure it's the avoidance of
the negative emotion so if I'm really
stressed and I'm going through a lot of
at work I will I have a higher
chance of masturbating that day not even
asting watching pornography okay so
masturbation is what leads to the
dopamine but watching pornography will
shut off the negative emotions so I've
worked with people who have pornography
addiction for example that will have
work on one screen and they will
literally have pornography open and
playing on the second screen you're
joking no very common so we don't talk
about pornography
addiction so so like and and the worse
their life is the more stress they have
that's when I'll ask them you know when
are the days that you have porn open on
the second screen and they'll say it's
like it's the day the stress the worse
their stress gets the worse their use
gets so how do you help that person you
teach them a couple of things one is
that you have to understand what the
pain is right so and and then you teach
them alternate emotional regulation
skills so if you teach them other ways
to manage their emotions they won't need
the pornography the reason that porn is
so addictive is because from a
biological perspective we're so wired
for sex that it is a very effective way
to shut off our negative emotions but if
you can teach them how to manage their
negative emotions and the second thing
that we do is we metabolize the source
of your negative emotions so if there is
some kind of trauma at the root as we
heal that trauma the drive for the
addiction will melt away interesting
have you dealt with a lot of people that
have a pornography addiction
sure and the sort of Common Thread is
that they all have some kind of early
trauma and they I've read in your book
as well that those people are typically
exposed to pornography at a younger age
yes so there's all kinds of stuff that
happens but yeah usually people have
what I would say is they have
unmetabolized emotions or a source of
constant streaming of negative emotions
does it create shame 100% in those
people is that one of the that's the
problem right so as I become addicted to
pornography I feel ashamed of myself and
what's my antidote to shame Stephen
pornography there we go so the that's
the downward spiral upward spiral looks
like like getting out of there so I'm
watching pornography I do something I
need less pornography yeah so so often
times what the upward spiral looks like
is when you feel shame come and talk to
me right so we're going to talk about
what you feel ashamed of you're going to
vent that negative emotion so we also
know this is something that Freud
discovered is that
experiencing emotion even if it's not
related to a real event weakens the
emotion so what he sort of found is that
if you can get someone to cry in your
office as a psychotherapist and they
vent that emotion out they feel lighter
they feel better the emotional energy is
left their body in some way so that and
then we often times will get to the
source of their trauma and we're going
to metabolize that emotion that's really
deep down there and that's kind of like
it's kind of like an oil well that's
just pumping up this black stuff so we
shut off the Oil Well we teach them
alternate emotional regulation skills
and we work on building a life that is
worth living what is one example from
your practice where someone has gone
from
really zero to a remarkable place is
there a case study that comes to mind
where you go oh my God that is proof
that any transformation is possible sure
so there's a privacy concern so I'm
happy to be a little bit General here
but um you know so I had someone who was
started
using opiates in their teenage
years uh and at the age of 32 went back
to
school um and has developed a career and
and became a best-selling author by the
age of 36 so in the four years that we
worked together they got to writing
which is they what they always wanted to
do published a book and like the book
was very very successful and then they
actually have a separate career on top
of that chapter five the first
conversation the hardest thing about
talking to someone about an addiction
they have is that the first conversation
has to be open without it affecting
their gaming Addiction in this case that
first conversation is the most difficult
often
yeah so it's not just for addiction so
if we sort of understand like the first
conversation that you have with someone
about something that they're not doing
well in their life and this relates to
like men or incels or whatever you have
to approach that non-judgmentally so if
you want to connect with someone and a
big part of what I believe about
addiction and I learned not believing
this is true is that you can't cure an
addiction for someone else so they have
to want to stop so I've had people you
know I used to work at two rehabs and
these are like 30-day rehabs where
people get forced into rehab never going
to work the person themselves has to
want to stop the addiction conquer the
addiction quit the addiction in order
for it to be successful so how do you
convince someone that okay this is a
problem and like you need to stop this
you can't you can't really convince them
but the best that you can do is approach
them non-judgmentally right so like help
me understand what is going on in your
life help me understand why you this
thing like you can have judgments in
your mind that's okay but be open-minded
and be compassionate recognize that if
this person is doing something they are
doing it for a reason if they didn't get
if their brain did not get more benefit
than harm out of it then their brain
would not be doing
it on that first
conversation and also that moment of
sort of change where they realize that
they want to make a change in their life
and it's you know enough is enough
people often refer to that as The Rock
botom
is it true that people need
to because I I spoke to a few people
about this whether we need to get to a
rock bottom in order to make those big
changes in our lives or if there's a way
to not get to Rock Bottom before we
decide to make the change so I'll give
you an answer from one of my patients
who I think knows this way better than I
do see when you hit rock bottom you can
always pull out a jackhammer and break
down to the next level so there's no
such thing as Rock Bottom there's just
as low as go before you start moving up
that's honestly what I believe so you
could say that I hit rock bottom but you
could easily I mean I'm sure I could
have done worse right and so a lot of
people for them it is hitting rock
bottom but I I I think really I I trust
my patience that it's just as far down
as you go before you turn around and
that's your lowest point we can all
think of people in our lives that we
want to help change and I I guess in
what I just said is part of the problem
because we want to intervene in their
lives and create change for them but we
we sometimes watch them sell self
sabotaging and self-sabotaging and then
telling us they have this goal they want
to be this or that or the other but then
their their behavior continues to follow
a similar pattern where they continue to
self-sabotage and as byst standards
sometimes we try and intervene we try
and help them in various ways I'll pay
for your therapist I'll take care of
your gym membership whatever what should
we be doing as byst standards of someone
who's saying they want to change but is
showing no sign of doing anything about
it great question so what we should do
is not be bystanders but also not quite
pay for therapy so this is something
that's very important so I once had a
very brilliant teacher at Massachusetts
General Hospital who told me that as a
doctor you should never go the extra
mile for a patient and then I was kind
of confused by that right because I was
taught that oh my God like as a doctor
you should sacrifice you need to go the
extra mile and he said the extra mile is
a mile too far so anything that someone
can do for themselves you should not do
for them so what I sort of really found
is that you know there there's really
interesting case of a patient that I had
that had was a child with HIV so this is
when HIV was first discovered they got
diagnosed as an infant so they had a
perinatal HIV exposure and so this is
when we were really discovering HIV and
so everyone bent over backwards for this
kid because this a poor this is a
seven-year-old kid with HIV so if they
ever did anything wrong it's not their
fault the kid has HIV they'd come late
to appointments they wouldn't do their
homework oh there's always people
bending over backwards to help this
person help this person help this person
so I was this uh person's doctor when
when they were in their late 20s and I
was stunned by how incapable they are
they can't do even the most basic things
like fill out an application for a
particular thing that they needed they
needed the nursing staff to sit with
them and fill out the application
because what we had done is engendered
some degree of helplessness by doing
everything for them so the biggest
mistake that a lot of parents make is
that they accept responsibility for
their kids and if we love someone who
has an addiction we want to protect them
from the consequences of that addiction
so we actually step up and we do more
the problem is that the moment that you
start doing more they will start doing
less so if you look at something as
simple as let's say you've got a
roommate and there's dishes in the sink
the more you take responsibility for the
dishes what is your roommate going to do
they're going to do them less the same
is true so what I sort of find is that
instead of because we're so afraid oh my
God like if I don't help them with this
if I don't pay for your therapy then
going to be you're so afraid and
so who's taking responsibility for it
you are let them ask you to pay let them
come to you and say you know what I
really want to conquer this I found
someone but I can't afford it will you
help me the outcomes that you see will
be drastically different in my own
practice sometimes I charge a lot of
money and what I have found 70% of my
practice at one point was free what I
found is the number of people who know
show for their appointments which I'm
giving them a big break the more of a
break I give them and if they're free
they show up the least if someone has
skin in the game they will actually do
it so my my patients who are actually
paying for my services they're the ones
who always show up so what we want to do
is we want to start by asking these
people hey tell me how you feel about
your addiction or not addiction just
tell me what's going on with your gaming
right like how do you feel about your
life like help me understand what's
going on with you start by just
understanding the person and if you do
that everyone has ambivalence that means
internal conflict there's a part of them
that wants to quit and there's a part of
them that doesn't want to quit the
problem is that anytime we see a flash
of them wanting to get better what do we
do we're like Yay let's do it and then
what happens we get that resistance from
them so if if I'm like if I come to you
Stephen I'm like hey man I'm thinking
about going to the gym what do you say
yeah come on come with me right and then
what do people do when you say that they
don't
come right so what's kind of interesting
so what we do is what I do as a
psychiatrist is like you know you're
just thinking about going to the gym but
like do you really need
to oh really you push back yeah right so
so whatever side you take they're going
to take the opposite side why' you do
that because that's what the science
tells us so there's this technique
called motivational interviewing and
anytime you're dealing with something
called ambivalence which is internal
conflict if you push them in one way
they're not moving in that way they're
going to move in the opposite way I'm
not saying that you can't encourage them
but let them take delad that's the big
difference let it be their motivation
let it be their motivation and anytime
they move in the right direction you
want to support that but don't ever push
them the choice is theirs and the less
that I do for my patients the better
that they end up doing last question you
talk about this 25% rule what is the 25%
Rule and how does one apply it so see we
all all think about goals where I want
to be now there's a really tricky
problem in our brain so if I have a goal
that I want to be a millionaire and I
work today and I earn
$10 how does my brain interpret that it
looks at the effort that I put in it
says $10 is nowhere near my goal and it
actually tanks my motivation because it
looks at this situation it says I have
not moved sufficiently close to my goal
so the bigger our goal is the harder it
is for our brain to get on board with
doing it so the 25% rule is take
anything that you want to accomplish and
cut it in half and then cut it and half
again and this should be your first goal
at a minimum you can even go smaller
than that you go 12.5 there's there's no
amount that is too small but generally
speaking if you really look at it the
more ambitious your goals are the harder
they will be to achieve and I know that
sounds kind of weird but you can still
achieve it but only if it's not your
goal that's been my experience so
there's Neuroscience to back this up but
even then you know when I went when I
was 18 years old I wanted to go to
Harvard and I wanted to be become a
doctor when I gave up on the goal and I
focused on the task at hand so if you
really look at how do you accomplish
great things not by wanting to
accomplish great things I can be at the
bottom of Mount Everest and I can look
at the top and I can say I want to climb
to the top of Mount Everest or I cannot
even look at the top of Mount Everest
whether I'm looking at the top or not
looking at the top the way to get to the
top is the same one step at a time so
it's really interesting because everyone
is so focused on goals what I've sort of
learned as a psychiatrist and even in my
own life is like focus on today focus on
doing something today and be super
careful about setting a big goal because
then even if you set a huge goal and you
do 50% of it you'll feel like oh my God
like I didn't accomplish my goal and
even 50% progress will feel like a
failure because you didn't hit your goal
right it's really weird the way that our
motivational circuitry works so cut your
goal in half and then cut it in half
again and focus on that one it makes
sense it's what um the performance
director of I think team Sky said David
braford talked to me about many years
ago he said that he used to ban the
athletes from thinking about the podium
and just focused them on their pedal
Strokes today on their bikes and that
team went on to become the greatest
cycling team of all time pretty much um
from being down and out and I always
wondered why he would he yeah he said he
banned them thinking about the medals
and stuff like that because it would
form as a distraction from today's
performance but it's difficult to do so
okay I'll stop setting goals oh or set
them 25% or set them with awareness no I
do anyway I to be honest I I don't set
big goals in my life I find it really
difficult when people ask me what's your
5ye or your 10y year plan you feel like
you're bullshitting because the answer
in reality is I'm just going to do my
very very best every day exactly right
so I I agree with that 100% because what
more than can you do yeah like setting a
10-year goal doesn't I mean we can sort
of think that it makes us work harder
and it can in some ways but it's not the
ideal way it's it's going to confuse
today and cause a lot of procrastination
and confusion about what I should be
doing today because if my goal is 10
million in 5 years like what like
absolutely doing a course online today
doesn't feel like yeah so if you have a
10-year plan you can afford to waste
today and you can afford to waste
tomorrow because you have so much time
exactly and that's not useful if you've
seen my most recent post on LinkedIn you
probably have seen that I'm on a bit of
a hiring spree at the moment across my
company flight group trying to find the
world's best talent and throughout these
years of building these businesses my
first Port of Call for hiring has always
been LinkedIn jobs who are a proud
sponsor of this podcast this is because
of two reasons number one LinkedIn isn't
just another job board it has a vast
network of more than a billion
professionals and quality candidates
which I believe makes it the best place
to find and hire professionals you can't
find anywhere else and number two their
process and features LinkedIn is
constantly finding ways to make the
hiring process easier with super easy
and intuitive features hiring is easy
when you have that many quality
candidates in fact 86% of small
businesses get a qualified candidate
within 24 hours through Linkedin jobs
post your job for free at linkedin.com
doac that's linkedin.com
doac to post your job for free right now
and of course terms and conditions apply
we have a closing tradition where the
last guest leaves a question for the
next guest not knowing who they're going
to be leaving it for okay and the
question that's been left for
you if you could write one more book and
that book was one page long and it was
the last message that you could send to
the world and your family what would you
use that page to say so I I can tell you
what I would want it to say but I think
writing it in one
page would be very difficult like I I
would do it but so I've thought about
this that you know if I die tomorrow I
basically only have one regret about
life I only have one thing that I want
to accomplish which is that I'm trying
very hard to help a lot of people in the
world and the one regret that I would
have if I died tomorrow is that I would
not have taught my children what I teach
the rest of the world so I've even
thought about this that if if I got
diagnosed with cancer and I had one year
to live how would I spend that year I
would write a book for my kids that
distills everything that I've learned
about this sort of motivation
Neuroscience spirituality it's all the
same thing it's all the same truth see
the yogis learned this stuff and they
were using the same brains that we
learned so they discovered all the
principles of Neuroscience through
internal observation so I would put on
that one page probably one page is how
many lines 16 lines 18 lines 20 lines
maybe so I'd probably write 20 sutras
that
are like the core of what I've learned
and that may be things like you know
like one of the sentences will be like
what is the ego the ego is that which
Compares in the sense of self how does
one introspection is the way to shed
yourself of like worldly expectations
like once you start to know yourself you
won't look to the outside world to tell
you who you should be and as long as
you're telling the outside world as long
as you're listening to the outside world
to tell you who you should be you'll
never be happy because they keep
changing right so some of this stuff it
would be something like that but that's
probably what I would do i' try to
distill everything that I've learned
into 20 lines I was hoping that I I can
do it in a book but one page would be
tough I'm curious about what some of
those other lines would be so You'
talked about introspection about ego uh
yeah so I would probably include um one
line about glisha and one line about
vasana so glisha is coloring so the
realization that most of what you
experience in life doesn't come from the
outside world it comes from what your
mind adds to the equation so I'll give
you an example so if I met you for the
first time and I called you a loser if I
said Stephen you're a
loser the impact of that these are just
words but whether that hurts you or
doesn't hurt you B is based on the
interpretation of your mind so another
good example is let's say I'm like
talking to a girl and I text her and she
doesn't text me back there are a
thousand reasons why she may not text me
back in 10 minutes but it is what my
mind adds to the reality of the world
that actually me the most and most
people don't realize this they think
that oh this person dislikes me and this
thing is going wrong and this thing is
going no it's not actually like that it
is your mind that is actually coloring
all of your
experiences so there' be one sentence on
Kisha one sentence on Vasa you know an
understanding of the ego an
understanding of where desires come from
how to be happy this whole idea that
chasing an external thing for happiness
will not ever achieve it in a lasting
way you got two kids
yeah what would be the last paragraph
you'd ever say to
them probably I'm sorry I have to
go and I wish I had more time with
you that's probably what I would say and
then I love you and
uh
I may be gone in this body but I'll be
around and we'll meet
again it's interesting because you know
when you
meditate we have this idea that we only
live this life and that's because of the
conditioning of our brain and there are
lots of studies there's a guy at
University of Virginia who who's done
research on past lives and I've even
done like past life Psychotherapy with
my
patients and when I was meditating I I
realized one day that I in a past life I
know this is going to sound completely
insane but I've I've done that what
you're hearing now is not a hypothetical
I've lost a child before I've been a
mother before and it took me some time
to figure this out but when you meditate
you start to discover things about
yourself and I have this very deep sense
of loss in me that I've lost a child
this is not hypothetical I know what
it's like to lose a child and it's
happened to me before and I still carry
that hurt with me from a past life so
when you ask me this hypothetical this
is not a hypothetical for me this is a
trauma that I've experienced just not in
this life so I I'm lucky that so far it
hasn't happened I hope it doesn't happen
but I've chosen to be attached to my
kids and in the same way that we talked
about you know the the moment that I
write the book is the moment that I open
myself up
to success of the book or disappointment
in the book in the moment that I choose
to love my kids I open myself up to the
hurt of losing them because I could lose
them one day
and so that's one question that I think
I've answered before it's first person
that's ever asked me that but you know
it's it's I I can feel the hurt I can
feel the loss and just in my own
experience maybe it's an imagination or
a construction from the neurons in my
brain but just what I've learned I think
it's like I've been there before and
it's very painful and I still carry that
pain with
me do you think that's some kind of
generational trauma or do you believe
that that was you in another life oh
same thing so I I think now we know from
EP studies of epigenetic inheritance
that we as human beings we actually all
inherit memories so I think it's really
interesting because even if you look at
your aversion to snakes how does you how
do you have a fear of snakes even the
first time you see see a snake you'll be
scared of it so we know scientifically
that we inherit memories that are not
our own so now the question is just a
little bit intellectual or philosophical
that if you inherit a memory was it you
I I don't know I mean it's part of your
DNA it's part of your EP genetic
expression would you consider that part
of you or not I think most people would
consider your DNA part of you so I I
think yeah we even have scientific
evidence of that you could argue is is
sort of a mechanism through which we
inherit memories from the past for sure
whether it's your life or not is Up For
Debate my girlfriend said this to me she
she's talked about traumas that she
feels like come from a past life it's
very difficult to
to believe very very difficult to
believe but my girlfriend always seems
to be right about everything eventually
I eventually come to learn through lots
of research that what she's saying isn't
crazy and she's she's she's gotten very
very emotional at times about things
that she thinks she's tapped into from
her past life through meditation she's a
breath work practitioner she's actually
in Costa Rica now doing some um some
Retreats and stuff it's so interesting
I'd love to I'd love to learn a lot more
about that but for now Dr K thank you so
much for um so much yeah you're one of
the most engaging people I've ever
spoken to in my life because you're so
deeply passionate about the things that
you speak on and your book is about much
more than gaming the book is called how
to raise a healthy gamer but it's about
everything it's about addictions it's
about our mind it's about our
relationships with both the technology
that we have and each other um the top
of the book it says end power struggles
break bad screen habits and transform
your relationship with your kids but
it's it's much more than just about kids
it's about um it's about all our
relationships with all things and all
people fundamentally because it's about
the human mind and that's why it's so
incredibly important
and if nobody has uh discovered you
online before I would highly recommend
they go and check out your YouTube
channel because you managed to distill
some of these complex things into highly
engaging science-based advice and it's a
remarkable talent that you have you're
one of the most effective communicators
I've ever encountered so thank you for
your time today thank you so much
Stephen it's been awesome being here um
I feel privileged to be a tiny slice uh
to be a tiny slice of your life cuz I I
can see
you're such an amazing dude and like I'm
very excited that you exist in the world
today and I get to see what you continue
doing oh what a compliment thank
you the key to growing a business is
making sure that it's scalable and this
comes with integrating into the right
platforms early in the game to support
your growth a platform that's helped me
and my team to do this is Shopify who
I'm sure you know by now because they do
sponsor this podcast Shopify is a
Commerce platform revolutionizing ing
millions of businesses worldwide we
recently launched our second version of
the D conversation cards on Shopify
which would not have been possible
without Shopify when I started
podcasting an online store was the
furthest thing from my mind but now
thanks to how simple it is to use the
platform it's made this whole process so
unbelievably easy it's actually the
internet's best converting checkout 36%
better on average compared to other
leading Commerce platforms if you guys
have haven't tried Shopify and your
business owners go and try it now
because you can sign up for a $1 per
month trial period just by heading to
shopify.com
Bartlet and you can get started for
[Music]
$1
oh